ESSAY 4.

 As we celebrate on the occasion of her Platinum Jubilee year, Her Majesty, The Queen. It is without any iota of doubt that It’s a thing of honor and joy to reminisce on the past experiences faced by the Commonwealth and its frontline workers in recent times.  Bursts of courage, commitment and selfless dedication have all been in full display at the frontline in these recent times. Truly, I must also say that those selfless and consistent help have gone a long way in helping the common man in diverse ways even to the point of bringing smiles on the faces of the people even in places where people have never had any reason to be happy. The Commonwealth is truly an association of independent countries who have freely come together to cooperate among each other for the benefit of their citizens.
In these rapidly changing times, countries around the world, both within and outside of the Commonwealth have been faced with unprecedented issues ranging from health pressures to human rights challenges, which have all prompted the development innovative ways to connect and transform difficult situations in order to cater for the wellbeing and needs of the populace. Being on the frontline for years now, I can say I have ample and foremost knowledge on how tragic events have transpired within these few times as well the critical steps taken by the frontline workers of the Commonwealth which will be outlined consequently.
The World as of 2022, faced health challenges majorly The COVID-19 pandemic, which posed a huge threat to health systems and also fundamentally changed the society. The COVID-19 pandemic also took a heavy toll globally, substantially impacting all Commonwealth members, economies and leading to approximately US$1.15 trillion in foregone gross domestic product (GDP) in just one year, compared to pre-pandemic growth trends in 2020, which caused economic contractions by approximately 10%. Nonetheless, even in the midst of all these, We, the Healthcare workers rose to the demand of treating these patients, caring for those who are most vulnerable and also the aiding of deployment of its wide-reaching networks of governmental, non-governmental and civil society organizations across all continents, even at the detriment and potentially significant cost to our own lives. There were increasing recognition of potential mental health impact of COVID-19 on frontline workers which called for provision of psychological support for us. However little attention was so far being paid to understanding the impact of working during a pandemic from healthcare workers’ own perspectives. There had been tremendous amount of fatigue and burnout on those of us at the frontline. Workers at the frontline, also struggled with high workloads and long shifts and desired adequate rest and recovery. Many experienced stigmas. Health care workers’ relationships with families, colleagues, organizations, media and wider public were complicated and could be experienced concomitantly as sources of support but also sources of stress. Our experiences during the COVID-19 pandemic are not really unprecedented due to the fact that the themes that arose from previous pandemics and epidemics were remarkably resonant with what we heard about the impact of COVID-19 globally as at 2020. Now, we have the opportunity to learn from the lessons of previous cases, mitigate the negative mental health impact of COVID-19 and support the longer term wellbeing of the healthcare workforce worldwide. 
Consequently, Climate change was and is still another significant issue faced by frontline workers and the Commonwealth body in general. The climate crisis affects every member of the Commonwealth and is one of the leading problems facing the planet. The link between climate change and challenges to global health is undeniable and the severity of these challenges are projected to escalate enormously causing even more pandemics if drastic measures are not taken. Climate change negatively affects the development of small and other vulnerable countries across the Commonwealth. Many Commonwealth countries were as at 2020, already facing increased temperatures, sea level rise, storm surges, drought, floods and hurricanes. Therefore, as frontline workers of this voluntary organization must be saddled with the sole aim of catering for the betterment of the people, the Commonwealth has taken drastic steps by supporting small and susceptible states by amplifying their calls for better climate action. Also frontline workers, through The climate programme of the Commonwealth focuses on strengthening the resilience of Commonwealth countries to the negative impacts of climate change. We provide member countries with measures and support for mitigating and adapting to the worst impacts of climate change. The work of the frontline workers is no doubts invaluable to the communities they serve. Frontline workers have been increasingly essential to battling disease, especially as climate change increases the pressure and makes those in remote areas harder to reach and treat. Climate change has also been observed to increase the risk of malaria. Malaria migrates higher as temperature rises. If we are to prevent the transmission of such diseases and ultimately eliminate them, the roles of the frontline workers have not and can never be overemphasized. 
I have the privilege of buttressing more on the value of frontline workers, which I won’t fail to do so. One question that ought to be continually asked and acted upon goes thus; “As the planet deteriorates further, how will frontline worker’s jobs change and how can these workers be more catered for even as the pandemic as come to an end?” Frontline workers are the vanguard of global health efforts and work within increasing challenging operating conditions, often dealing with the detrimental effects of climate change, war, propaganda and inadequate infrastructure. I therefore use this opportunity to continually urge the leaders of the Commonwealth to provide clear messages that frontline workers are always valued and have been solely responsible for managing the pandemic. Also, to maintain personal wellbeing and resilience, leaders should aim to monitor frontline workers’ wellbeing and proactively address concerns. The appreciation towards frontline workers is also long overdue. A plan of action should consistently and ideally be made available to address the pandemic impacts on the frontline workers. 
All in all, we have continued to appreciate the support, breadth of experiences and knowledge that working together brings, and I hope we shall maintain this renewed sense of closeness and community. Furthermore, relationships with others across the Commonwealth will ever remain important, as we strive to deliver a common future that is sustainable and more secure, so that the nations and neighborhood in which they live, wherever they are located, become healthier and happier places for us all. Truly, to continue to serve our Commonwealth family is a true honor and a privilege.
Long live the Queen!
